---
layout: post
title: Python 3 at NCI?
---

This week I've been thinking about how we'll manage Python packages for the
ACCESS community at NCI to add better support for Python 3. I've started adding
Python 3 support to my own scripts (using travis.org to check they actually
work), and it's not been that bad, and we're starting to get users ask on the
helpdesk for Python 3 versions of the climate-focused packages we support.

There are a couple inconvenient differences between Python 2 and Python 3.
Print is now a function, rather than a statement, so brackets must be added
anywhere you print. A number of built-in packages were renamed, meaning
occasionally you need to go searching for the new name when you get an import
error. Finally files you open are now interpreted as Unicode, rather than plain
bytes as Python 2 and most Unix tools do, so data files need to be opened
specifically in binary mode.

Past these differences, which can be worked around easily enough using the
`__future__` and `six` packages, the core of the language is pretty much the
same. The majority of core libraries like `numpy` and `pandas` have been
converted to work with either version, but many libraries and scripts remain
Python 2 only, while some newer ones only support Python 3.

Currently NCI only support `numpy`, `scipy` and `matplotlib` on the Raijin
supercomputer, and ask users to install extra packages to their home directory
using Pip. This is because managing the dependencies between library versions
gets very complicated quite quickly when supporting a larger number of packages
for a wide range of different use cases, especially as some researchers using
the machine want extreme stability so that their results are reproducible,
while others want to make use of the latest and greatest features.

The ACCESS community separately maintains a number of python libraries in the
`/projects/access` area. These are both libraries that are complicated for
researchers to install, for instance file format libraries that require binary
dependencies to be compiled, as well as odds and ends like `pip` and `pytest`
that are helpful for general development as well as climate and weather
research.

We support these libraries using the same environment module system that NCI
uses for the software it supports. Environment modules are little TCL scripts
that modify your `$PATH`, allowing multiple versions of a software package to
be installed alongside each other, so loading the module`python/2.7.5` will add
`/apps/python/2.7.5/bin`, and `python/3.4.3` will add `/apps/python/3.4.3/bin`.

Our ACCESS pythonlib modules work much the same way, only modifying
`$PYTHONPATH` so that the Python interpreter can find the libraries in the
module. We've even got a nifty script that searches PyPI for a specific library
version, installs that version into the `apps/pythonlib` directory, then
installs a module file so that researchers can use it.

There are two downsides with this however. Firstly dependencies need to be
installed and tracked separately, which is a manual process as PyPI doesn't
track this information, and secondly our setup only supports Python 2.7. As the
different patch versions are mostly compatible with each other a library
installed with 2.7.5 will still work with 2.7.6, so this is ok if we only
support 2.7 variants.

If we start supporting Python 3 though we've got another axis to think about -
both the library version as well as the Python version. Add tracking
dependencies on to that, which is somewhat tedious using the TCL module files,
and a dedicated package manager becomes attractive.

Anaconda is the natural choice for this - it has a sophisticated dependency
solver and a database of packages, meaning we don't need to worry about
tracking dependencies ourselves. It also handles binary dependencies, so less
need for us to work out random build systems, and has a large number of climate
and weather related packages available.

Intel have also recently released on Anaconda a number of libraries optimised
for their processors, which would be great for people doing number crunching.
Previous attempts to compile these ourselves have resulted in a mess of linker
errors.

Unfortunately NCI aren't presently too keen on supporting Anaconda centrally,
since it includes system packages like OpenSSL where getting prompt security
updates are important. I've also got my own concerns about their packaging
system, which is entirely separate from PyPI so if you create a package with
dependencies that aren't in the Conda ecosystem you must re-package them
yourself, and manually monitor for updates from the developer.
